---
layout: post
title: Signals
category: post
author: octogavrix
---

Signals are essentially the building bricks of a program written in [FRP]. Basically, you program not what to do, but rather how many signals program has, where these signals take values from and how signals are connected with each other and thus how values passing through are transformed along the way. You can think of signal as a pipeline ([@ashfurrow](https://twitter.com/ashfurrow) brings more on this analogy in his [book](https://leanpub.com/iosfrp)) and your program is nothing but a complex pipeline system, when events are being passed as inputs to this pipeline, and results are presented when output comes out.


## ReactiveCocoa signals

[ReactiveCocoa] 2.x brings some abstraction over signals concept, representing them as `RACStream`. Such streams can pass events of 3 types: **value**, **error** or **complete**. After sequence passes through **error** or **complete** event it is assumed to be completed and will never pass through new values (if any) pushed to it.

There are two types of streams: push-driven `RACSignal` and pull-driven `RACSequence`. **Push-driven** means that values for the signal are not defined at the moment of signal creation and may become available at a later time (for example, as a result from network request, or any user input). **Pull-driven** means that values in the sequence are defined at the moment of signal creation and we can query values from the stream one-by-one. In [ReactiveCocoa] sequences are usually created from Cocoa collections like `NSArray`, `NSSet`, `NSDictionary` or even `NSIndexSet`. In upcoming [ReactiveCocoa] version 3 however sequences are going to be deprecated, but this question is out of scope for this post.

## RACSequence <=> RACSignal

`RACSequence` can be turned into `RACSignal` and vice versa. To turn `RACSequence` into `RACSignal` by scheduling it's sequence values into `RACScheduler` which will then push said values into newly created `RACSignal`:

```objc
	RACSequence *sequence = [@[@1, @2, @3] rac_sequence];
	RACSignal *signal = [sequence signalWithScheduler:[RACScheduler mainThreadScheduler]];
```

`RACSignal` can be turned into `RACSequence` by gathering it's values into some sort of buffer. There are several ways to do this. First is to gather all values sent to this `RACSignal` until that signal completes, then convert the buffer into `RACSequence`:

```objc
	RACSignal *signal = ...;
	NSArray *buffer = [signal toArray];
	RACSequence *sequence = [buffer rac_sequence];
```

One should note that `-toArray` method is blocking. It blocks until the signal completes, and that actually makes sense, we don't know how long and how many values will be available in the future.

The other way to turn `RACSignal` into `RACSequence` without waiting for signal to complete is to use `-sequence` method. This method creates private `RACSignalSequence` sequence which uses `RACReplaySubject` internally. Basically, this internal subject holds all values passed into this signal, and when accessing created sequence instance at a later time, it'll be sequence of all values received by the original signal until this time. 

```objc
	RACSignal *signal = ...;
	RACSequence *sequence = [signal sequence];
```
Although `-sequence` method doesn't wait until original signal completes, it may block if that signal hasn't recevied _any_ value yet. It will block until first value is passed into signal.

In ptractice, you mostly interested in `RACSignal` signals, as they represent future values, whereas `RACSequence` sequneces are mostly just a convenient way to apply sequence operation on a collections of objects.


## Signal sources

The majority of signals existing in avarage program are _derived_ signals. By derived I mean signals created by applying whatever operation to the other signal:

```objc
	RACSignal *existingSignal;
	RACSignal *newSignal = [[existingSignal map:^ id (id value) {
		return someAction(value);
	}] ignore: nil];
```

In this example `newSignal` is a signal pushing results of `someAction(value)` called on values pushed to `originalSignal` and any `nil` is ignored. However, there are two new signals created in this code snippet. First created by `-map:` method and then second — by calling `-ignore:` method on first newly created signal. Both of these methods create new signals.

But where is the original source of the signal? How one can _push_ values to the signal? Actually, there are a lot of ways to create source of the signal values.

### KVO observing

As seen in examples in [ViewModel] post, signals can be created as observer for KVO values:

```
	RACSignal *signal = RACObserve(object, propertyToObserve);
```

`signal` will be pushing new values of object.propertyToObserve as it changes. `RACObserve` is a macro expanded to `-rac_valuesForKeyPath:observer:`. Hidden caveat here: this macro _always_ captures `self` as an observer, so if you use this macro inside a block, make sure you're not casuing retain cycle.

### UIKit Categories

[ReactiveCocoa] provides a [set of categories](https://github.com/search?q=rac+in%3AUI+extension%3Ah+user%3Areactivecocoa+repo%3Areactivecocoa+path%3AReactiveCocoaFramework%2FReactiveCocoa%2FUI&type=Code&ref=searchresults) for UIKit classes to generate signals for user-generated events. It's very important as we all know, UIKit succs when it comes to KVO observing.

### RACSubject

`RACSubject` is literally a bridge between reactive and non-reactive code. One can manually push values into subject and subjects are `RACSignal`s too (in fact, `RACSubject` is a subclass of `RACSignal`), so they can be subscribed to. 

```objc
	RACSubject *subject = [RACSubject subject];
	RACSignal *derived = [subject map:^(id value) {
		return someAction(value);
	}];
	[subject sendNext:@YES]; // at this point value @YES is pushed into 'derived' signal
```
<br/>
### Dynamic signals

The most interesting are dynamic signals backed by private `RACDynamicSignal` class. It's called 'dynamic' because it's user created. You can turn any asynchronus action into a signal, here's a typical pattern:

```objc
	RACSignal *signal = [RACSignal createSignal:^RACDisposable *(id<RACSubscriber> subscriber) {
		id operation = asynchronusAction(^(id asyncActionResult, NSError *error) {
			if (error) {
				[subscriber sendError:error];
			}
			else {
				[subscriber sendNext:asyncActionResult];
				[subscriber sendCompleted];
			}
		});
		return [RACDisposable disposableWithBlock:^{
			[operation cancel];
		}];
	}];
```

where `asynchronusAction()` takes a block as a callback. 

Don't be scared by this 'disposable' thing, we'll get to it back later. In short: if asynchronous operation can be cancelled, we want to cancel it when signal is destroyed (in [ReactiveCocoa]'s terms — disposed).

## Subscription

We first see `subscriber` in previous example. That's the basics of singals infrastructure in [ReactiveCocoa] — subscription. Signals are connected together through **subscribing**. Let's pretend we want to create another signal from previous one by mapping values:

```
	RACSignal *mapSignal = [signal map:^id (id value) {
		return someAction(value);
	}];
```

Here's what will happen: when second signal subscribes to first one, that block we passed in '-createSignal:' is called and `subscriber` value passed into it is our second signal (yes, `RACSignal` conforms to `RACSubscriber` protocol). Note that `asynchronusAction()` is not called until someone subscribes to dynamic signal. **Actions defined in subscription block only occur upon subscription**. You can think of it the other way: dynamic signal we created is **turned on** when someone subscribes to it. 

Another thing to notice: subscription block will be called **for each** subscriber. So, if create another derived signal: 

```objc
	RACSignal *anotherMapSignal = [signal map:^id (id value) {
		return anotherAction(value);
	}];
```

there will be another subscription to original dynamic signal and subscription block will be called again!. In this particular scenario, we most likely want asycnrhonous action to be performed once and multiple subscribers will mess things up. To workaround this issue there is `RACConnection` concept. Long story short, it shares underlying signal with subscribers through internal `RACSubject`. We'll see how it works later.

To be strict, in those examples I gave actually, no subscription ever happen. That's because `-map:` internally creates another dynamic signal and subscribes to original signal only upon it's own subscription. That means subscriptions happen in reverse order over the chain of signals. To trigger subscriptions the last signal in chain must be subscribed to 'real' subscriber, e.g. who subscribes immediately:

```objc
	[anotherMapSignal subscribeNext:^(id value) {
		//whatever
	}];
```

or 

```objc
	RAC(object, property) = anotherMapSignal;
```




[FRP]:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_reactive_programming
[ViewModel]:{% post_url 2014-03-28-ViewModel %}
[ReactiveCocoa]:https://github.com/ReactiveCocoa/ReactiveCocoa